\vsssub
\subsection{~Program design} \label{run:design}
\vssub

The core of \ws\ is the wave model subroutine. The wave model routine can be
called by either a stand-alone program shell or any other program that
requires dynamically updated wave data. Two such programs are provided with
the \ws\ release. Auxiliary programs include a grid preprocessor, a program to
generate artificial initial conditions, a generic program shell (and a
corresponding input pre-processor) and output post-processors.  In the
discussion of the model below, file names will be identified by the {\file
file} type font, the contents of a file by the {\code code} type font and {\sc
fortran} program elements by the {\F fortran} type font.

The main wave model routine is {\F w3wave}. Data files are identified with the
file extension {\file .ww3}, except in the multi-grid wave model {\file
ww3\_multi}, where the file extension identifies an individual grid. For
simplicity, the file extension {\file .ww3} will be used throughout this
chapter.  A relational diagram including the basic data flow is presented in
Fig.~\ref{fig:elements}.

The grid preprocessor writes a model definition file {\file mod\_def.ww3} with
bottom and obstruction information and parameter values defining the physical
and numerical approaches. The wave model requires initial conditions,
consisting of a restart file {\file restart.ww3}, written by either the wave
model itself, or by the initial conditions program. If this file is not
available, the wave model will be initialized automatically, depending on the
ability of the model to start from calm conditions. If linear growth or
spectral seeding is switch on, the model will start from calm conditions ($H_s
= 0$), otherwise the initial conditions will consist of a parametric
fetch-limited spectrum based on the initial wind field (see the corresponding
option in the initial conditions program).  

The wave model routine ({\F
  w3wave}) optionally generates up to 9 restart files {\file
  restart{\em{n}}.ww3}, where {\file{\em{n}}} represents a single digit
integer number. The wave model also optionally reads boundary conditions from
the file {\file nest.ww3} and generates boundary conditions for consecutive
runs in {\file nest{\em{n}}.ww3}. The model furthermore dumps raw data to the
output files {\file out\_grd.ww3 }, {\file out\_pnt.ww3}, {\file track\_o.ww3}
and {\file partition.ww3} (gridded mean wave parameters, spectra at locations,
spectra along tracks, and partitioned wave data, respectively). The tracks
along which spectra are to be presented is defined in the file {\file
  track\_i.ww3}. Note that the wave model does not write to standard output,
because this would be inconvenient if \ws\ is part of an integrated
model. Instead, it maintains its own log file {\file log.ww3} and optionally a
test output files {\file test.ww3} for a shared memory version of the model,
or {\file test{\em{nnn}}.ww3} for distributed memory versions, where {\em nnn}
is the processor number starting with 1.  Finally, various output
post-processors are available (binary post-processing of raw gridded fields,
point output and track output files; NetCDF and GRIB(2) packing of wave data;
post-processing for later GrADS graphical processing of gridded and spectral
data). A more detailed description of all program elements and their input
files is given below. Note that the source codes of each routine are fully
documented. This documentation is an additional source of information about
\ws.

\input{run/fig_flow}

Files specific to \ws\ are opened by name within the program. The unit
numbers, however, have to be defined by the user\footnote{~Except for {\file
ww3\_multi}.}, guaranteeing the largest possible flexibility for
implementation in integrated models.

Next to the wave model subroutine, an initialization routine and an interface
routine for data assimilation are provided. The latter routine is intended to
be run side by side with the wave model routine. The routine includes a
generic interface that provides all necessary model components to perform full
spectral data assimilation. This routine is integrated into the generic wave
model shell, which is set up to perform time step managements for a wave model
with or without data assimilation. The shell also provides a simple yet
flexible way to provide the data assimilation scheme with various types of
data. Data assimilation has not yet been included in the multi-grid wave model
shell.
